Drafted README and code for new mmhost code sample (#1)
HakimTem/oneAPI-samples: DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Features/experimental/ip_authoring_mmhost/README.md

# Memory-Mapped Interfaces (mmhost)

> This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to use the memory-mapped interfaces with IP authoring and set the configurable parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to configure Avalon memory-mapped interfaces for kernel arguments with the IP authoring flow.
```

***Documentation***:  The [DPC++ FPGA Code Samples Guide](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/articles/explore-dpcpp-through-intel-fpga-code-samples.html) helps you to navigate the samples and build your knowledge of DPC++ for FPGA. <br>
The [oneAPI DPC++ FPGA Optimization Guide](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide) is the reference manual for targeting FPGAs through DPC++. <br>
The [oneAPI Programming Guide](https://software.intel.com/en-us/oneapi-programming-guide) is a general resource for target-independent DPC++ programming.

| Optimized for                     | Description
---                                 |---
| OS                                | Linux* Ubuntu* 18.04/20.04, RHEL*/CentOS* 8, SUSE* 15; Windows* 10

> | Hardware                          | Intel® Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA <br> Intel® FPGA Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) D5005 (with Intel Stratix® 10 SX) <br> Intel® FPGA 3rd party / custom platforms with oneAPI support <br> *__Note__: Intel® FPGA PAC hardware is only compatible with Ubuntu 18.04*

Reviewer: We will have to update the `hardware` row but I am not sure how. Check the code samples repo for other IP Authoring tutorials (if any) and see what they do and we can discuss this further.
Reason: The hardware devices mentioned here are existing FPGA devices. In the IP Authoring flow the source code describes some aspects of the FPGA board - so it is unlikely to match these existing Intel FPGA boards and it doesn't make sense to list those here.
This template likely needs to be updated for IPA tutorials.

| Software                          | Intel® oneAPI DPC++ Compiler <br> Intel® FPGA Add-On for oneAPI Base Toolkit

> | What you will learn               |  The basic concepts of on-chip memory attributes <br> How to apply memory attributes in your program <br> How to confirm that the memory attributes were respected by the compiler <br> A case study of the type of performance/area trade-offs enabled by memory attributes

Reviewer: Update this row

| Time to complete                  | 45 minutes

## Purpose

> When optimizing a design, choosing the right interface can effectively improve the Quality of Results (QoR), often without requiring changes to the design's algorithm. Sometimes the system that a  will be added to, dictates what interfaces must be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When optimizing a design, choosing the right interface can effectively improve the Quality of Results (QoR), often without requiring changes to the design's algorithm. Sometimes the system that a RTL IP component will be added to, dictates what interfaces must be used.
```

> This tutorial shows how to use the Memory Mapped Host (mmhost) macros to configure memory-mapped interfaces for kernel's arguments. These generated interfaces will follow the Avalon MM protocol. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to use the Memory Mapped Host (mmhost) macros to configure memory-mapped interfaces for kernel's arguments. These generated interfaces will follow the Avalon Memory Mapped (MM) protocol. 
```

> Deciding what combinations of Avalon-MM interfaces your kernal uses is dependent on both 

Reviewer: Replace this one throughout the doc:
```suggestion
Deciding what combinations of Avalon-MM interfaces your kernel uses is dependent on both 
```

the desired area and performance of the kernal, as well as constraints from the system 
(i.e., what type of memory is available?, is there contention on the memory bus?, etc.).

### Memory-mapped interface parameters

The following parameters are available for configuration:

| Memory Attribute                 | Description               | Default Value
---                                |---   |---
| `buffer_location`          | The address space of the interface that associates with the host. | 0
| `awidth`          | The width of the memory-mapped address bus in bits. | 41
| `dwidth`          | The width of the memory-mapped data bus in bits. | 64

> | `latency`         | The guaranteed latency from when a read command exits the kernal when the external memory returns valid read data. | 16

Reviewer: The default is 1 now - did the FD get it wrong - I'll update the FD
```suggestion
| `latency`         | The guaranteed latency from when a read command exits the kernal when the external memory returns valid read data. | 1
```

| `readwrite_mode`  | The port direction of the interface. (0: Read & Write, 1: Read only, 2: Write only) | 0

> | `maxburst`        | The maximum number of data transfers that can associate with a read or write transaction. | 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `maxburst`        | The maximum number of data transfers that can be associated with a read or write transaction. | 1
```

> | `align`           | The alignment of the base pointer address in bytes. | 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `align`           | The alignment of the base pointer address in bytes. | Alignment of the datatype
```

| `waitrequest`     | Adds the waitrequest signal that is asserted by the agent when it is unable to respond to a read or write request. | 0

### Default interface

If no memory-mapped interface macro is specified for a pointer kernel argument, then a mmhost interface with all default parameters is generated for it.
```c++
struct PointerIP{
  int *x, *y, *z;
  int size;

    void operator()() const {
      for (int i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
        int mul = x[i] * y[i];
        int add = mul + z[i];
        y[i] = mul;
        z[i] = add;
      }

>     }

Reviewer: Since the focus is on the argument interfaces, we can omit the kernel code here.
```suggestion
    void operator()() const {
      // kernel code
      ...
    }
```

};
```

### Memory-mapped interface implementation restriction

The mmhost macros are restricted to use with functors, which means that they cannot be used when the kernel is written as a lambda function. Also, all arguments of the macro must be specified, even if just one parameter is being changed from the default values.

#### Example 1: A kernel expressed using a functor model with mmhost macro.
```c++
struct MyIP {
  mmhost(
    1,       // buffer_location or aspace
    28,      // address width
    64,      // data width
    16,      // latency
    1,       // read_write_mode, 0: ReadWrite, 1: Read, 2: Write
    1,       // maxburst
    0,       // align, 0 defaults to alignment of the type
    1        // waitrequest, 0: false, 1: true
  ) int *my_pointer;

  void operator()() const {
    ...
    // Kernel code
    my_pointer[x] = y;
    ...
  }
}
```

> An Avalaon bus is generate for every unique global memory in the system. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each mmhost macro with a unique buffer location directs the compiler to build a Avalon-MM interface at the top level device image IP RTL module. A single interface is created for all pointer kernel arguments which are not annotated with the mmhost macro.
```

> If the mmhost argument is specified as a conduit interface then an input wire is generated at the top-level device image IP to carry the the pointer address into the kernal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the mmhost argument is specified as a conduit interface then an input wire is generated at the top-level device image IP module to carry the pointer address into the kernel.
```

If the mmhost argument is specified as a register-mapped argument, the input pointer is written into a register map associated with the kernal. An Avalon bus is generated for writing those arguments into a register map, with no seperate wire needed at the top level device image to input the address.

> #### Example 2: Changing default mmhost interface. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 2: Conduit and Register Map based mmhost arguments,
```

```c++

> // A memory-mapped interface that is implemented as a register.

Reviewer: Show these inside a struct like the above examples

  register_map_mmhost(
    1,       // buffer_location or aspace
    28,      // address width
    64,      // data width
    16,      // latency
    1,       // read_write_mode, 0: ReadWrite, 1: Read, 2: Write
    1,       // maxburst
    0,       // align, 0 defaults to alignment of the type
    1        // waitrequest, 0: false, 1: true
  ) int *memory_mapped_pointer;
// A memory-mapped interface that is implemented as a wire.
  conduit_mmhost(
    1,       // buffer_location or aspace
    28,      // address width
    64,      // data width
    16,      // latency
    1,       // read_write_mode, 0: ReadWrite, 1: Read, 2: Write
    1,       // maxburst
    0,       // align, 0 defaults to alignment of the type
    1        // waitrequest, 0: false, 1: true
  ) int *memory_mapped_pointer;
```

> If unspecified, when using only the ```mmhost(...)``` macro, a register_map based input argument interface is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the ```mmhost(...)``` macro is used (instead of `conduit_mmhost(...)` and `register_map_mmhost(...)`), a register map based argument interface is generated by default.
```

### Memory Base Addresses assigned by the compiler

> 

Reviewer: We have decided against drawing attention to the ipinterfaces.xml file and instead want the users to understand the feature from the HTML reports alone.

So here, state that the inferred memory and its properties can be seen in the Memory Viewer (get the exact panel names from the HTML report panels)

> The compiler infers a unique global memory for each pointer argument that is annotated with a buffer location. An entry describing the interface of each such memory can be found in the file ipinterfaces.xml which is generated in the "*.prj" output directory. The entry specifies various properties of the memory including the start address that was assigned to the memory by the compiler. Each buffer_location will have its address defined there, among other parameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compiler infers a global memory for each unique buffer location. An entry describing the interface of each such memory can be found in the file ipinterfaces.xml which is generated in the "*.prj" output directory. The entry specifies various properties of the memory including the start address that was assigned to the memory by the compiler. Each buffer location will have its address defined there, among other parameters. 
```

To understand how these start addresses are generated and how the compiler assigns special values to the top bits of the addresses please see the complete documentation on memory-mapped interfaces. If the parameters are not set correctly, this can lead to undefined behaviour.

The file will have the following entries based on the kernel arguments used in this tutorial:

> Example of a pointer argument in the ipinterfaces.xml:

Reviewer: Replace this description by stating that the information about the start address and other properties can be found in the Memory Viewer.

```xml
<global_mem name="1" default="1" max_bandwidth="0" config_addr="0x0" type="device private" allocation_type="host,shared">
  <interface name="1" type="agent" width="64" address="0x2000000000000" latency="16" latency_type="fixed" waitrequest="1" size="0x10000000">
    <port name="mem1_r" direction="r"/>
  </interface>
</global_mem>
<global_mem name="2" max_bandwidth="0" config_addr="0x0" type="device private" allocation_type="host,shared">
  <interface name="2" port="mem2_rw" type="agent" width="64" address="0x3000000000000" latency="16" latency_type="fixed" waitrequest="1" size="0x10000000"/>
</global_mem>
<global_mem name="3" max_bandwidth="0" config_addr="0x0" type="device private" allocation_type="host,shared">
    <interface name="3" port="mem3_rw" type="agent" width="64" address="0x4000000000000" latency="16" latency_type="fixed" waitrequest="1" size="0x10000000"/>
</global_mem>
```

> ### Avalon MMHost Bus Signals

Reviewer: I am thinking we can omit this section. Did the HLS tutorial mention these?

| Signal | Description | Width
| --- | --- | ---
| `address` | Represents the byte address | 1 - 64 bits
| `writedata` | Data for write transfers | 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, or 1024 bits
| `readdata` | The readdata driven from the agent to the host in response to a read transfer | 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, or 1024 bits
| `byteenable` | Enables one or more specific byte lanes during transfers on interfaces of width greater than 8 bits. Each bit in byteenable corresponds to a byte in writedata and readadata | 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 bits
| `waitrequest` | An agent asserts this waitrequest signal when unable to respond to read/write requests | 1 bit 
| `readdatavalid` | Used for variable-latency pipelined read transfers, asserts that the readdata signal contains valid data | 1 bit
| `burstcount` | Used to indicate the number of transfers in each burst | 1 - 11 bits

### Buffer Location in Pointer Address Bits
The compiler encodes certain information regarding the virtual address space in top bits of the 64 bits wide pointer address. Below is a table showing which bits correspond to what function

> | Bits | Function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Bits (LSB - MSB) | Function
```

| --- | ---
| 0 - 40 | Addressing within the memory system
| 41 - 46 | Buffer Location information
| 47 | Not Used
| 48 - 61 | Used by runtime layer
| 62 - 63 | Indicates whether a pointer is a global or local memory pointer

Users do not need to encode this information themselves in most cases. The compiler automatically generates logic to embed this information from the buffer location specified on the pointer kernel argument in the source file.

> Why is this embedding needed?

Reviewer: From the FD, add the section about when the user needs to embed this information themselves.

In some cases, the compiler cannot figure out which buffer location a pointer corresponds to, and it creates logic in the generated RTL that inspects the top bits of the pointer at runtime to detect the buffer location and route the memory transaction to the correct global memory

### Tutorial Code Overview
This tutorial demonstrates how to implement a memory-mapped interface in an IP authoring flow. The design performs a multiply and add operation on two input vectors, stores the result of the multiple in the second vector, and the result of the add in an output-only vector.

> * Memory-mapped interfaces needs to contain all parameters to work correctly.

Reviewer: Move this line to when the macro is introduced
```suggestion
* All entries of the macro must be specified when the macro is used.
```

## Testing the Tutorial

> In ```mmhost.cpp```, two seperate Kernal IP's are declared for the same operation of adding and multiplying two vectors. ```PointerIP``` which declares a global memory interface for all pointers, and ```VectorMADIP``` which declares a seperate interface buffer location to each argument. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In ```mmhost.cpp```, two seperate Kernal IPs are declared for the same operation of adding and multiplying two vectors. ```PointerIP``` which does not annotate the pointer kernel arguments with any macros, and ```VectorMADIP``` which uses the mmhost macros to annotate to specify a separate memory interface for each argument. 
```

```c++
struct PointerIP {
  int *x, *y, *z;
  int size;
  

>   PointerIP(int *x_, int *y_, int *z_, int size_)

Reviewer: Remove the constructor from these examples here. We just want to highlight how the argument interfaces are specified here.

    : x(x_), y(y_), z(z_), size(size_) {}

    void operator()() const {
      ...
    }
};

struct VectorMADIP {
  mmhost(BL1, ...) int *x;
  mmhost(BL2, ...) int *y;
  mmhost(BL3, ...) int *z;
  int size;

  VectorMADIP(int *x_, int *y_, int *z_, int size_)
      : x(x_), y(y_), z(z_), size(size_) {}

    void operator()() const {
      ...
    }
```

> We test and compare the kernal times for both of these IP's. Notice that the ```VectorMADIP``` is much faster. This is because all three pointers can be accessed concurrently without arbitration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We test and compare the kernal times for both of these IPs. Notice that the ```VectorMADIP``` is much faster. This is because all three pointers can be accessed concurrently without arbitration. 
```

| Hardware                          | Intel® Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA <br> Intel® FPGA Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) D5005 (with Intel Stratix® 10 SX) <br> Intel® FPGA 3rd party / custom platforms with oneAPI support <br> *__Note__: Intel® FPGA PAC hardware is only compatible with Ubuntu 18.04*
| Software                          | Intel® oneAPI DPC++ Compiler <br> Intel® FPGA Add-On for oneAPI Base Toolkit
| What you will learn               |  The basic concepts of on-chip memory attributes <br> How to apply memory attributes in your program <br> How to confirm that the memory attributes were respected by the compiler <br> A case study of the type of performance/area trade-offs enabled by memory attributes
| Time to complete                  | 45 minutes

## Purpose
When optimizing a design, not only changing the algorithm might help, but also
choosing the right interface can effectively improve the QoR. However, sometimes
the system that a component will be added to dictates what interfaces must be
used. Choosing different interfaces can impact the QoR of a component without changing

> the algorithm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When optimizing a design, choosing the right interface can effectively improve the Quality of Results (QoR), often without requiring changes to the design's algorithm. Sometimes the system that a component will be added to, dictates what interfaces must be used.
```

> With the mmhost interface controls, the user can configure memory-mapped interfaces for their components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to use the Memory Mapped Host (mmhost) macros to configure memory-mapped interfaces for kernel's arguments."
```
Component was a HLS product term. In SYCL and OpenCL land we use the term kernel to refer to the functional unit that is executed on the FPGA device.

> Deciding what combinations of Avalon-MM interfaces your component uses is dependent on both 

Reviewer: Add a sentence explicitly mentioning that the generated interfaces follow the Avalon MM protocol,

Author: Done, there should be a sentence mentioning that they follow the Avalon MM protocol

the desired area and performance of the component, as well as constraints from the system 

> (ie. what type of memory is available, is there contention on the memory bus, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(i.e., what type of memory is available?, is there contention on the memory bus?, etc.).
```

### Memory-mapped interface parameters

The following parameters are available for configuration:

| Memory Attribute                 | Description               | Default Value
---                                |---   |---

> | `buffer_location`          | The address space of the interface that associates with the host. | 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `buffer_location`          | The address space of the interface that associates with the host. | 0
```

> | `awidth`          | The width of the memory-mapped data bus in bits | 28

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `awidth`          | The width of the memory-mapped data bus in bits. | 28
```

> | `dwidth`          | The width of the memory-mapped address bus in bits. | 64

Reviewer: The description of awidth and dwidth need to be flipped. And the defaults in this table are not accurate. Get the correct defaults from the RTL Interfaces FD I linked on the JIRA

Author: Flipped the descriptions and changed the default values to the one found in the FD IP Authoring document

| `latency`         | The guaranteed latency from when a read command exits the component when the external memory returns valid read data. | 16
| `readwrite_mode`  | The port direction of the interface. (0: Read & Write, 1: Read only, 2: Write only) | 0
| `maxburst`        | The maximum number of data transfers that can associate with a read or write transaction. | 1
| `align`           | The alignment of the base pointer address in bytes. | 0
| `waitrequest`     | Adds the waitrequest signal that is asserted by the agent when it is unable to respond to a read or write request. | 0

### Default interface

> If no memory-mapped interface parameters is informed for a pointer, then a mmhost interface with all default parameters is assumed for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no memory-mapped interface macro is specified for a pointer kernel argument, then a mmhost interface with all default parameters is generated for it.
```

```c++
struct PointerIP{
  int *x, *y, *z;
  int size;
  
  PointerIP(int *x_, int *y_, int *z_, int size_)
    : x(x_), y(y_), z(z_), size(size_) {}

    void operator()() const {
      for (int i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
        int mul = x[i] * y[i];
        int add = mul + z[i];
        y[i] = mul;
        z[i] = add;
      }
    }
};
```

### Memory-mapped interface implementation restriction

> Memory-mapped interface is restricted to function implementations, which means that it is not supported for lambda implementation. Also, all parameters must be preset, even if just one parameter is being changed from the default values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mmhost macros are restricted to use with functors, which means that they cannot be used when the kernel is written as a lambda function. Also, all arguments of the macro must be specified, even if just one parameter is being changed from the default values.
```

> #### Example Functor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: A kernel expressed using a functor model.
```

```c++
struct MyIP {
  mmhost(

>     ... // All mmhost parameters.

Reviewer: I think it is important to show all the parameters here for at least one argument.

  ) int *my_pointer;

>   MyIP(int *input_pointer) : my_pointer(input_pointer) { ... } // Constructor for our IP.

Reviewer: You can omit the ctor both here and above since that is not what we want to draw focus to. Users can understand that when they look at the code sample .cpp file.

Author: Omitted both constructors for further code simplification and clarity

    ...
  }

  void operator()() const {
    ...

>     // Functor code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Kernel code
```

    my_pointer[x] = y;
    ...
  }
}
```

> #### Example 1: How to set-up a correct mmhost interface

Reviewer: This is not needed. It will be covered above in the functor example.

Author: Deleted example, renamed above example to example 1

```c++
// A memory-mapped interface must contain all parameters, in the following order:
  mmhost(
    1,       // buffer_location or aspace
    28,      // address width
    64,      // data width
    16,      // latency
    1,       // read_write_mode, 0: ReadWrite, 1: Read, 2: Write
    1,       // maxburst
    0,       // align, 0 defaults to alignment of the type
    1        // waitrequest, 0: false, 1: true
  ) int *memory_mapped_pointer;
```

#### Example 2: Changing default mmhost interface.

> If the mmhost argument is specified as a conduit interface then an input wire is generated at the top-level device image module with the same width as the address width property.

Reviewer: This section needs cleanup and perhaps we need to add some info at the start of the tutorial too to set the stage:

An Avalon bus is always generated regardless of whether it is a conduit mmhost or a register_map mmhost. As many Avalon buses are generated as there are unique global memories in the system. The mmhost macros allow the user to specify unique memories and their properties.

For conduit mmhost arguments, a wire is created at the top level device image IP to carry the pointer address into the kernel. For register_map mmhost arguments, the input pointer is written into a register map that is associated with the kernel. In such cases, another Avalon bus is created for writing those arguments into a register map. Hence no separate wire is needed at the top level RTL module to input the address.

See the two regtests we have that show this difference:
https://github.com/intel-innersource/applications.fpga.oneapi.products.acl-test/blob/main/sycl/ip_authoring_flow/designs/vector_add_mmhost_register_map/prev/compile/ipa/reg.rout
https://github.com/intel-innersource/applications.fpga.oneapi.products.acl-test/blob/main/sycl/ip_authoring_flow/designs/vector_add_mmhost/prev/compile/ipa/reg.rout

Author: I removed some of the original description, and made a slightly newer one based on this description. Any suggestions to that or does more need to be added ?

If the mmhost argument is specified as a register-mapped argument, then only the Avalon bus will be created at the top-level device image module. The argument will be written into the register map
```c++
// A memory-mapped interface that is implemented as a register.
  register_map_mmhost(
    1,       // buffer_location or aspace
    28,      // address width
    64,      // data width
    16,      // latency
    1,       // read_write_mode, 0: ReadWrite, 1: Read, 2: Write
    1,       // maxburst
    0,       // align, 0 defaults to alignment of the type
    1        // waitrequest, 0: false, 1: true
  ) int *memory_mapped_pointer;
// A memory-mapped interface that is implemented as a wire.
  conduit_mmhost(
    1,       // buffer_location or aspace
    28,      // address width
    64,      // data width
    16,      // latency
    1,       // read_write_mode, 0: ReadWrite, 1: Read, 2: Write
    1,       // maxburst
    0,       // align, 0 defaults to alignment of the type
    1        // waitrequest, 0: false, 1: true
  ) int *memory_mapped_pointer;

> ```

Reviewer: At the end mention that when nothing is specified i.e., the macro `mmhost(...)` is used, we default to register_map based input argument interface.

Author: Done, at the end of the example there is a mention of that
